Some of these kids take their future too seriously, in my opinion.
Daddy may want them to be an engineer, but they may not have any interest in being an engineer, but here they are in engineering.
So I tell it, it's not too late to make changes in your life when you're here.
Because I made numerous changes before I wound up in physics, and I wound up in physics
And there's some truth in why I wound up in physics, because of that long walk across campus.
It's not all nonsense.
And so I tell that story, and I had a bright young kid in my class.
He was an engineer, electrical engineer.
And after the class was over, he made a pretty good grade.
I've forgotten, probably an A, but I don't remember.
Oh, he'd come see me, tell me how he's doing.
And then he graduated in engineering.
And he got a great job, I think, with Exxon.
And he's a black kid.
And so he was a black kid.
He's got an engineering degree.
He's off with one of the major oil companies and doing great.
And he'd call me every now and then.
And one Christmas, I got this phone call.
He says, Dr. Adair, I just called and told you I'm quitting my job.
Oh, Robert, what are you doing?
Yep, yep.
He said, I've always wanted to be a doctor.
My dad wanted me to be an engineer, and I remember what you told me in class and what you told me along the way that I've got, I should make it.
It doesn't matter what I'm going to do.
I've got to be the best I can at whatever I do, and everything will work out.
I've always wanted to be a doctor.
I'm going to come back home, live at home, Houston.
I'm going to go to the University of Houston, take some biology, and then I'm going to apply to medical school.
Well, okay, Robert, that's what you think.
Good luck.
So that kid came back, went to Houston.
He had offers from
You can name the five best medical schools in the country.
Chose to go to Vanderbilt.
So he went to Vanderbilt, got his medical degree three years ago.
He's now interning at Tulane.
I think he's finished, residency I guess I should say.
I think he's in residency in radiology.
He's going to do great.
And I'm sure he's got a father who's unbelievably proud of him.
Along the way, he's gotten married.
We went down to Houston to the wedding.
And now he has a daughter.
He must be two years old now, living over there in New Orleans.
So things like that, of course, are the high points.
What about any research, publication, high points?
Not really.
I had fun when I was doing research, enjoyed it, and published a number of papers, not an outstanding number, but enough for those days.
I haven't done anything in years.
I've just been a bureaucrat.
Let's shift into athletics.
You were, went on the athletic council what year?
1979.
Yeah, 79.
O.D.
Butler was going off.
I think somebody else was going off, and there were going to be a couple of openings.
I ran into Marvin Tate on campus one day, and he asked me if I'd be interested, and I'm sure.
Next thing I know, Chuck calls me.
Chuck Sampson calls me and says, there are going to be some openings.
We're going to interview a few faculty members, and your name's been mentioned.
And so— Sampson was the chairman then.
He was the chairman then.
Asked me to come over.
I think I had lunch with Marvin and Chuck and just chatted.
And another one who was done the same way was John Hoyle.
And so I thought, well, Hoyle will be named to the athletic council.
I mean, he's a baseball player.
And so then, I don't know, I guess, I don't remember whether Chuck called me.
I don't remember.
Maybe Jarvis was called or something.
Anyhow, it said that I had been appointed.
Then I found out Hoyle had been too.
We both went on at the same time.
I was on the council and just a member of the council learning the situation.
What were the realities of being on the athletic council in the early years?
What did you all deal with?
We dealt with a lot of things in those days.
We dealt with everything in those days.
Budget.
Budget came through us.
In fact, that was one of the reasons that Earl was on there, Earl Bennett was on there.
He worked very closely with Wally on the budget.
And the budget had to be approved by us before it went anywhere else.
So we were involved in the budgeting and we were involved in the scheduling of the contests.
We were involved in hiring of coaches.
So we were involved in most everything that is involved nowadays where the Athletic Council is not involved in much of anything except academics.
All right.
Chuck becomes interim president, Chuck Sampson.
Right.
What happened to the athletic council at that point?
Earl became the interim chair.
Earl Bennett.
Earl Bennett became the interim chair and things went along normally.
And then when
Frank was named president, then Chuck came back as chair of the council.
Stayed on with Frank as vice president for a while.
And then the board hired Jackie.
Of course we didn't know anything about what was going on until suddenly Jackie was paraded in front of the athletic council.
We all met him.
And then the announcement was made that he was hired.
I have a feeling that he had already been hired, but I don't know that.
I just suspect he was.
Is it correct that the athletic council had nothing to do with his being identified as the coach?
No, no, not a thing.
Of course, it came as a shock to Frank also.
In fact, he got very upset about it.
He called a meeting of the academic council
and had a closed-door meeting with them.
And I don't remember much about that meeting.
I think my main job at that meeting was trying to see that there weren't any eavesdroppers at the door.
I remember, I don't think I heard a whole lot of what he said to the, to the group, but he was threatening to resign and all those good things.
And, but then the board went ahead and hired Jackie.
You know the board hired Jackie
as athletic director and told him they wanted him to come down here and fire Tom and take over.
Tom?
Wilson.
Oh, oh, oh.
The board fired Marvin.
That left the athletic director position vacant.
Wally was named interim athletic director, and then the board went off to hire Jackie and asked Jackie to come down and fire Tom and take over both jobs.
Jackie told him no.
He wouldn't do that.
that if they wanted him, they're going to have to hire him as both jobs, but they're going to have to fire Tom first.
So then the board came back and fired Tom.
and then hired Jackie at both jobs, athletic director and head football coach.
And then he came down and the rest is history.
And you were on the athletic council during his years?
I was on the athletic council and then Frank called me over one day and asked me if I would chair the athletic council.
He wanted to split things up a bit and Chuck would remain as faculty representative to the NCAA, but he wanted me to chair the council and be represented to the Southwest Conference.
He wanted it that way for a period of time.
That was a transition time because Chuck was still members of various NCAA committees and so he didn't want to remove him and lose those positions with the NCAA.
And so we stayed in that position for a couple of years, and I don't think Chuck liked it, and I know his wife was furious about it, but I didn't.
You know, all I was done, I thought I was asked to do it and said yes.
I didn't ask for the job, didn't campaign for the job, but when asked to do it, I said yeah, I'd do it.
And then after a year or so of that, then I was named to NCAA representative too.
It's pretty clumsy if you're not both.
So after about a year then, I was then representative to the NCAA, the Southwest Conference, and chaired the Athletic Council.
And this is in the mid-'80s.
That would have been about 84, 85.
And I stayed in that position for five or six years.
And then Bill Mobley came.
Now I've forgotten when did he come.
He came in 88, didn't he?
Is that right?
So I had that position for that long.
Because my job in those days as faculty representative was, I was involved in all the investigation going on about the Jackie business.
And so I worked with our lawyer, Ted Hayoski, and I spent many days in Chicago with our Chicago lawyers on the NCA problems.
And then the board named Mobley to be the next president.
Our appointment in front of the NCA Committee on Infractions was August the 13th.
The board named Mobley president sometime in early July, effective August 1st.
Hayaski and I are in Chicago.
We call back, find out the board is naming Mobley president, and we tell the secretary, send word to Mobley that we'll be there tomorrow to brief him on this.
I mean, he's suddenly got to represent the university in front of the NCAA on August 13th, less than two weeks after taking the job.
Two hours later, we got a message back, stay in Chicago.
He's coming there.
And so the next morning, Mobley shows up in Chicago, and we spend two days in Chicago going over everything with him, with the lawyers, and getting him up to speed on this.
And then we all fly back together, and that's when I find out what his plans are for Robert Smith.
I was riding back next to Bill Mobley, and he told me that he was going to name Robert the executive vice president or whatever, vice president or chief vice president or something.
I thought, oh geez, we're in trouble now.
I think Bill Mobley was a very, very good president.
It was really fun for me to see the contrast with Frank.
I think Frank was a good president, but in a much, much different way.
And I think I've told you that I was really tempted to have some fun with Frank, but I restrained myself because Frank shot from the hip.
I mean, you could go in.
He said, that's a good idea.
I need to do it.
And I was just really aggravated at the growth of administrators on this campus.
So I wanted to go in to Frank and say, Frank, there are too many administrators in the dean's office.
Won't you make each dean send an assistant dean back to the faculty?
I bet he would have done it.
All right, how well did Mobley in those first weeks, how well did he handle the NCAA?
Beautifully, absolutely beautifully.
We went in front of that committee and he did impress them, that he was here to take charge and that things were changing and that he was going to be the boss
And he already had a resolution from the Board of Regents that athletics was his responsibility.
And I think he saved us from a much more severe penalty.
And he had gotten the...
authorization from the board that he was in charge of athletics.
And so later in that year, that fall, when athletics blew up again, he was in a position to negotiate with Jackie over time for him to go.
And so he was able to pull that off.
And that was not a unanimous vote of the board.
There was a movement to fire Bill Mobley that I am told went up to about a
six and three or five and four vote in favor of letting him do what he was going to do or firing him and finding a president who would keep Jackie.
Who else during that NCAA investigation, who else deserves a pat on the back for standing up for what was right?
The leadership for the former students association that came in after that.
The biggest change I've seen from my perspective as faculty representative of the NCAA has been in the former Students' Association because the former Students' Association were not behind Mobley in firing Jackie.
By the time we got around to our future troubles, where we got in trouble with the Dallas former student putting athletes to work and paying them for not doing enough or anything,
The former students came down hard, hard on him and almost unanimously were behind the president in that this university is going to do it right.
And that was a—and so the leadership there, and I'm not sure I can name you those people, but if you look at who was the president of the association in 89, 90, 91, those leadership people carried that whole organization into the right
into the field.
In hindsight, did A&M, as far as you look back, did A&M handle itself reasonably well in dealing with the infractions that were committed back then?
Yes.
It's hard to
to say what was really going on.
I don't know what was really going on.
And it's accurate to say that Jackie was not
implicated in any of the violations directly.
So he was certainly guilty by association because he had assistant coaches who were doing things that definitely should not have been done.
The question might be was he ordering them to do them, and you have to believe that he
knew what was going on.
So he certainly was involved.
Now I believe Jackie's real problem was in thinking he could change some real criminals into being good citizens.
I have to think
that Jackie thinks that he was off on a road to becoming a bad person, and some coach got him by the collar and turned him into a reasonably good citizen.
Now, Bill Mobley wouldn't agree that he's a good citizen, but I think he's a reasonably good citizen, but because
I think Switzer must be the same way.
These coaches think they can take these renegade kids that nobody should be gambling on and turn them into good citizens.
Jackie got burned and burned badly by George Smith and Switzer got burned by a number of them up there in Oklahoma.
They were outlaws from day one.
And I think Switzer and Sherrill knew they were outlaws, but they felt, I can make a good kid out of this kid.
We had some basketball infractions also during your day.
Right.
In hindsight, is there anything we didn't do that we should have in dealing with that?
We hired the wrong coach.
We hired a coach who was young, naive, and got himself in trouble quickly.
I think he might well have
intended to do things right, but he got caught up in the New York agents, and so we had him for one year, and we suffered.
We took some real painful shots from that.
I think we did all we could.
I don't know what else we could have done.
He was doing things he shouldn't have been doing with a New York agent.
Any other sports?
Did we have any shortcomings?
Well, we had the second go around in football, you remember.
We had the Jackie Sherrill 1988 accusations that we got severe penalties for.
Then we had the basketball.
And then we had the situation where the Dallas former student had
a number of kids on the payroll and they were not on the job working as they should.
We got hammered pretty hard for that.
But I don't know what else we could have done.
We were doing more monitoring of that situation than anybody else in the country.
And still this person did that.
We got hammered by the NCAA for not having a better monitoring system when we had the best in the country.
We got hammered for lack of institutional control when in fact we had more control than any university in the country.
We just were the first to get caught at not monitoring the summer jobs the way they now are monitored.
The NCA's changed the rules primarily because of us.
You now have NCA rules that require you to keep logs on where they are working, who they're working, all these things that nobody was doing in those days.
Other sports, no problems?
No.
Not that I can remember.
How much time did your duties as faculty representative and chairman, how much time did those consume?
Rises and falls, but during Jackie Sherrill's time it took lots of time.
Lots of time when we were going through those troubles or any of our investigations.
My responsibilities declined in years though because all through the NCA structure you now have compliance coordinators.
And when I was first in this job, there were no compliance coordinators.
I was a compliance coordinator.
But by the time we came to our second round of problems, we had a compliance coordinator.
And that compliance coordinator reported to Robert Smith.
And so a lot of the traveling around the country with the lawyers was for them, not for me.
And I was just a...
In the NCIA's view, I was an overseer still, but I was not actively participating in the investigations.
So my time consumption for those type things went down with the compliance coordinators.
In certain respects, in several areas, that's the way it is now because there's a compliance coordinator,
I meet with him on a monthly basis, have a meeting with him tomorrow.
He and I, and I have the chairman of the Athletic Council there.
That's a story we can also talk about.
I meant to get to it, but didn't a minute ago.
And then we have the academic supervisor in the athletic department.
I meet with him monthly, along with the chairman of the athletic council.
And these people are the people who are doing the overseeing, doing the work.
I am overseeing them.
We have Pam Reynolds and a young lady who's now working in registrar's office.
I meet with them monthly.
And so I am sort of the umbrella over it all, but they are doing the work.
Whereas in the old days, I was actually doing some of the work.
So I spend 25, 30 percent of my time at that now.
I am on some, I am on the most important NCA committee now.
That's something with the NCA.
You've got to stay in this job, and I'll come back to that in a minute.
in order to be able to get into some of these significant positions with the NCAA.
I am now there.
I am chairing a subcommittee of the Academic Eligibility and Competition Committee for the NCAA.
And my subcommittee is continuing eligibility.
And so all rules that have to do with keeping a student athlete eligible either pass through or originate in my committee.
And so that's a fairly significant job within the NCAA that I've managed to come to because of my longevity in this job.
Now, that brings us back to when I had all jobs.
I was chair of the Athletic Council and the athletic representative of the NCAA and to the Southwest Conference.
Mobley was president.
The faculty senate was rumbling about these
people on the athletic council staying there for long periods of time.
And so I went to Mobley and said we probably needed to make some changes.
And I wanted to reorganize the athletic council.
I think I made a mistake.
I'm not happy with the reorganization.
But the one point that I am happy with
is that we separated the job.
And so my recommendation to Mobley was that we have six faculty members on the athletic council, each two serving, or all serving three-year terms, going off, two going off every year, and eligible for a reappointment one time.
And so that's what we've gone to.
And one of those six then would be appointed chair of the Athletic Council, and that's the way we do it now.
Bart Childs is the chairman of the Athletic Council.
That delighted me because that then gave responsibility for the on-campus stuff to that chair.
That person is the person that needs to interact with faculty, senate, and this.
My responsibilities are primarily off campus.
I am on the governing board for the Big 12 Conference.
I'm on the committees for the NCAA.
And that's enough, because I have, oh, eight or 10 meetings a year lasting two or three days that keep me out of town.
And then doing the homework for all those meetings,
And so having all the other on-campus stuff and chairing the meetings, the monthly meetings of the council and working with the council, that's somebody else's responsibility.
I'm a member of the council.
but I don't have to worry about calling the meetings and running the meetings and that sort of thing.
So we made that change, and that made the faculty senate happy.
I serve at the pleasure of the president.
He can remove me at any time he wishes, and I can stay in the job as long as he wishes.
But all other faculty members come and go on the council, and that keeps faculty senate happy and the other faculty, plus it's a healthier situation.
You have new people coming in.
The mistake I made was recommending a structure that has it as large as it is, because we used to be a working group, and we used to
be able to sit down and really do something.
Now there are 15 or 20 people at the meetings, and some of them are voting members and some of them aren't, and I must say that the structure idea was mine.
I must also say that we didn't have that many vice presidents in those days either, but each vice president now is on it, dean of faculties is on it, and then you have a liaison person from here, from there, from there, and it's just too many people.
Of the presidents, and I'm only going to ask the positive, of the presidents you've worked with in athletics, which one has the clearest understanding of athletics and how it ought to operate?
Bill Mobley, although that might be selling Ray Bowen a little short.
I'd have to put them pretty close, maybe.
I guess I'd say I see
I see Mobley more clearly because he followed Frank, and Frank is tremendously anti-NCAA, and so that pretty well restricts his objectivity on most things we had to deal with.
But he, I don't know if you ever talked to him about the NCAA, but he despises the NCAA.
Which, and I'm not going to ask the negative on this, which coaches of any sports would you give at A&M, would you give the greatest praise to?
Yes, well, coaches are coaches.
But I haven't been dissatisfied with very many coaches.
I really, I can mention Tony Barone because there are aspects of him that I really, really liked.
There are aspects of his characteristics that I despised.
He cussed and hollered and screamed and that drove me crazy.
His kids went to class.
and progressed academically.
I bet if you look at the number of graduates, I haven't done this, but I bet you would find that Tony Barone's kids graduated at a better rate than any of the other coaches we've had.
He lived across the street from us for two years.
Oh, really?
He has yet even to wave back to me.
Is that right?
Well, he's a very bitter man right now.
I went over to chat with his son twice.
First day we were there, and then when the son announced he was going to Marquette, I went over to take my business card.
I said, the current AD at Marquette I hired at UTEP.
take this card to him, tell him I ask you to bring it, introduce yourself to him, it wouldn't be bad at all for you to know the A.D.
No Barone ever said boo.
And they were that way in the whole neighborhood.
I suspect they were not that way when they came.
She was very, very
happy, pleasant person.
He was too.
I liked him a lot, but he, I don't understand it either.
I think he's a good coach and why he hadn't found a job, but I think he's better at Texas A&M.
I mean, we got the beautiful facility and just as we get the beautiful facility that he probably has an opinion that if he had that facility, he could recruit.
And he's bitter over that, but he's probably bitter too because he hasn't found a job elsewhere, because he's a good coach, in my opinion.
But I didn't like the hollering and screaming and cussing and ranting and raving part of his characters.
But to answer your question,
Coaches in any sport to praise.
Yeah, yeah.
Well, you know, I don't really get to know the lesser coaches, but you know, one of the real princes along the way was the old baseball coach, Tom.
Oh, yes.
Tom, Tom, Tom.
Oh my goodness.
Yeah.
Yeah, because I felt the same way about him.
I really like the golf coach who's just now retiring, Charlie.
I had an interview session with him.
Did you?
Uh-huh.
And you've got to like Ted Nelson.
I had him as a freshman the first semester.
Did you really?
Yeah.
Hard, hard, hard working.
He didn't make high grades, but he sure did work ahead.
That's the kind of kid I'm looking for, a hard worker.
When I start thinking about our high-profile coaches,